Codestarts phase 1: Allow extensions to influence newly generated apps (#10372)
quarkusio/quarkus: independent-projects/tools/codestarts/codestarts.adoc

= Quarkus - Codestarts

This guide explains how to create and configure a Quarkus Codestart for an extension.

== Description

"Codestarts" is the name we gave to our Quarkus quickstart code generation system. 
Codestarts provide a personalized Quarkus getting started experience and really show the Quarkus breadth.

> Quarkus extensions are able to provide one or more well defined codestarts which will contain the necessary resources and code examples required to get started using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Quarkus extension are able to provide one or more well defined codestarts which will contain the necessary resources and code examples required to get started using that particular extension.
```

== How it works

> There are two kinds of codestarts contributing to the generation of a project, the kind where we want to have only one for a project (called Base) and the rest (called Extra).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two kinds of codestarts contributing to the generation of a project, the kind where we want to have only one for the base project (called Base) and the rest (called Extra).
```

aren't they actually called 'base' and 'extra' no capitalization?

Author: yes I'll update

Base:

* project: The project skeleton (e.g. a Quarkus project)
* buildtool: The build tool (e.g. Maven, Gradle, Gradle with Kotlin DSL)
* language: The coding language (e.g. Java, Kotlin, Scala)
* config: The config type (e.g. yaml, properties)

Extra:
* tooling: Anything that can be added to improve the project (e.g. dockerfiles)
* example: Any Quarkus extension can provide example code. The user can decide to activate it or not.

Each codestart consists of:

> . A specific directory

Reviewer: add example name?

Reviewer: do you mean unique name here ?

Author: yes

Author: ```suggestion
. A codestart unique name, ie `my-codestart`
. A directory for the codestart files, ie `my-codestart/`
```

. A `codestart.yml` file

> . Optionally some templates which follow a structure and naming conventions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Optionally some templates which following a common structure and naming conventions
```

*NOTE* The `codestart.yml` file and the directory structure follow the same principle, it can optionally contain a base and/or some language overrides.

=== Project generation

When generating a Quarkus project:

> . Codestarts to use are resolved depending on the input

Reviewer: which input ?

> . The Codestarts' shared data is processed to make it available for all codestarts

Reviewer: "shared data from its codestarts.yml" ?

Author: ```suggestion
. The Codestarts' `shared-data` (defined in the different codestart.yml) is merge together and made available to all codestarts
```

. The relevant files are processed:
** Only the files that are related to the selected language are processed

> ** The files are processed differently based on a naming convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** The files are processed based on a naming convention, i.e <give example>.
```

Author: ```suggestion
** The files are processed differently based on a naming convention, ie `MyClass.tpl.qute.java`.
```

** The data is used to render Qute templates

> ** We always process in this order: language, project, buildtool, config, custom, other.

Reviewer: make it an actual list?

Author: ```suggestion
** We always process in this order: 

. language
. project
. buildtool
. config
. tooling
. example

```

. The data of the codestart to generate
. All codestarts "shared" data
. The user input
. Some specific post processing (e.g. adding dependencies)

*NOTE* The data (shared or not) can also be specific to a language.

=== Directory Structure

*NOTE* `codestart.yml` is the only required file.

* `codestart.yml` must be at the root of the codestart
* `./base` contains all the files that will be processed
* `./[languageName]` contains all the files that will be processed if the specified language has been selected (overriding base)

=== codestart.yml

codestart.yml:
[source,yaml]
----
name: the unique name - REQUIRED
ref: the reference name (not unique) to use for extension matching (else the name is used)
type: the type [example (default), project, buildtool, language, config] or any custom type
fallback: flag to indicate that it should be selected as fallback when no codestart has been selected with type - Only for base types
preselected: flag to indicate that it should be pre-selected - Only for extra types.
spec:
  [base or language name]: the specification (base, java, ...)
    data: a map of data to use only for this codestart

>     shared-data: a map of data to use accross all codestarts

Reviewer: we should somewhere list the default name/data codestart properties/data will be fed in.

Author: I am preparing a command to display merged `shared-data` for a given `CodestartInput`.

Reviewer: aren't there some that are always the same ?

Author: yes you have: https://github.com/ia3andy/quarkus/blob/codestarts-v0/independent-projects/tools/codestarts/src/main/java/io/quarkus/devtools/codestarts/CodestartData.java#L19

and also some auto-generated ones:
https://github.com/ia3andy/quarkus/blob/codestarts-v0/independent-projects/tools/codestarts/src/main/java/io/quarkus/devtools/codestarts/CodestartData.java#L90

`codestart-project.<basetype>.name` (ex: `codestart-project.buildtool.name`)

Author: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/11085

    dependencies: a list of dependencies to add when this is selected
    test-dependencies: a list of test dependencies to add when this is selected
----

> === Files Naming Convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Naming Convention for files
```

> * containing `.tpl.qute` will be processed with Qute (`.tpl.qute` will be removed from the output file name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `.tpl.qute` will be processed with Qute (`.tpl.qute` will be removed from the output file name).
```

> * containing `.include.qute` is used as a Qute template for inclusion (only available locally to the codestart).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `.include.qute` is used as a Qute template for inclusion (only available to the codestart, not listed in the generated project ).
```

  Example: When using `{#include [name]}` in a template, it will look for `[name].include.qute` in the language dir, then in the base dir or the codestart.

* an output strategy can be defined for specific files, it defines some specific logic on how to deal with those files.

 Example: in the Quarkus project `codestart.yml`:
[source,yaml]
----
output-strategy:
  "pom.xml": smart-pom-merge # smartly merge pom.xml contents together
  "README.md": append # they are appended together
  "readme.md": forbidden # it will fail if found in any codestart

>   "README.adoc": forbidden

Reviewer: forbidden..why ?

Author: I don't think we can have multiple `README` types merged together, we need to choose one or the other at project level, no?

Reviewer: I guess :)

spec:
  base:
    data:
      # Some data for my templates which gives could be overridden by the user input
      some:
        data:
          here: bar
          there: foo
    dependencies:
      # the dependencies needed for my codestart (note that the extension dependency is auto-added if missing)
      - io.quarkus:quarkus-foo
      - io.quarkus:quarkus-resteasy
      # ... you can also provide a version (when it's not part of the platform bom)
      - group:artifact:version
    test-dependencies:
      # test dependencies
      - io.rest-assured:rest-assured
----

*NOTE* You don't need to add `pom.xml` or `build.gradle`, it is going to be auto generated. It will include the dependencies provided in the `codestart.yml`.

2. Add you example code in java, kotlin or scala

* java/src/main/java/org/acme/foo/Foo.java:
[source,java]
----
package org.acme.foo

import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Path
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType

@Path("foo")
class ExampleResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    fun hello() = "Hello foo"
}
----

* kotlin/src/main/kotlin/org/acme/foo/Foo.kt
* scala/src/main/scala/org/acme/foo/Foo.kt

> *NOTE* Just add `.tpl.qute` if you want it to be rendered with qute and use some data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*NOTE* Just add `.tpl.qute` if you want it to be rendered with qute and use some data and simple logic
```

*NOTE* Most of the time you won't need it for code, but you can use a `base` directory to add files to process for all languages.

2. Add some configuration (if needed)

> The `base/src/main/resources/application.yml` file is going to be merged with the other codestarts config and automatically converted to the selected config type (yaml or properties).

Reviewer: what happens if two extensions list the same key ? warning, error, nothing ?

Author: For now, it's silently overridden depending on extension ordering which is close to gravity :) I guess we should fail?

Reviewer: warning just to not make it so a rogue extension blocks everything.

Author: I'll do that in another PR

Author: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/11083

Note: if it's specific to a language, you can put the config in each languages folders

* base/src/main/resources/application.yml (using quarkus yaml config convention):
[source,yaml]
----
quarkus:
  http:
    port: 8081
----

3. Create a readme section (if needed)

This will be appended to all different selected examples.

* base/README.md
[source,markdown]
----
# FOO Example

The Foo Example shows...
----

=== Tips for writing extension example code

> - You don't need to care about buildtool, dockerfiles, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your example must/should be independent from buildtool and dockerfiles
```

if there is more then list them specifically; ... is too fuzzy

- Use the package `org.acme.[unique-name]` for your sources.
- Use the path `/unique-name/...` for your REST paths
- Write tests for your examples

> - Examples in different codestarts must be independent, only the config and the build file are merged.

Reviewer: move this up as the first - repeat it at the end :)

Author: Sure I'll make it red also

Reviewer: add a blink tag :) (j/k)
